---
title: "An Introduction to R Shiny."
author: Marinus Louw
date: 2019-01-17
draft: true
tags: ['shiny']
---

## Introduction
Shiny is an R package designed to easily create powerful interactive web applications. To see how these applications are implemented, please visit the [Show me Shiny gallery](https://www.showmeshiny.com/fracking-growth/). 

The appeal to Shiny is quickly realised when browsing through the hundreds of apps created by users. Shiny's growth as a tool for business has also seen tremendous growth with consulting firms providing innovative and new ways of portraying data rather understandable ways. Shiny's traction comes from its ease of use. You don't need experience in web development to be able to design a Shiny dashboard. Shiny thus sidesteps web developer languages such as CSS, HTML or JavaScript and makes use of R syntax within the R environment. The possibilities of making use of data, visually, and interactively has now become part of the R-user's tool kit.

## Shiny Template
Most Shiny apps depend on the same template that is used to construct and build a web interface.

The template can be separated into its two main components:
1. User Interface (UI) The UI creates the visual aspects of the webpage. This is what becomes visible to the end-user and consists of laying out both the inputs and the outputs of an app.
2. Server object. The server object acts as the brain of all Shiny apps in that it creates an output from calculating the information specified in the inputs.

```
library(shiny)
ui <- fluidPage() 
server <- function(input, output) {} 
shinyApp(ui = ui, server = server) 
```
Shiny apps can become extremely nuanced but as an example, the code below specifies an app designed to show a sidebar panel and a main panel. 

```
library(shiny)
library(ggplot2)
load(url("http://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.datacamp.com/production/course_4850/datasets/movies.Rdata"))

# Define UI for application that plots features of movies
ui <- fluidPage(
  
  # Sidebar layout with an input and output definitions
  sidebarLayout(
    
    # Inputs
    sidebarPanel(
      
      # Select variable for y-axis
      selectInput(inputId = "y", 
                  label = "Y-axis:",
                  choices = c("imdb_rating", "imdb_num_votes", "critics_score", "audience_score", "runtime"), 
                  selected = "audience_score"),
      
      # Select variable for x-axis
      selectInput(inputId = "x", 
                  label = "X-axis:",
                  choices = c("imdb_rating", "imdb_num_votes", "critics_score", "audience_score", "runtime"), 
                  selected = "critics_score"),
      
      # Select variable for colour
      selectInput(inputId = "z", 
                  label = "Colour by:",
                  choices = c("title_type", "genre", "mpaa_rating", "critics_rating", "audience_rating"),
                  selected = "mpaa_rating")
    ),
    
    # Outputs
    mainPanel(
      plotOutput(outputId = "scatterplot")
    )
  )
)

# Define server function required to create the scatterplot
server <- function(input, output) {
  
  # Create the scatterplot object the plotOutput function is expecting
  output$scatterplot <- renderPlot({
    ggplot(data = movies, aes_string(x = input$x, y = input$y,
                                     colour = input$z)) +
      geom_point()
  })
}

# Create a Shiny app object
shinyApp(ui = ui, server = server)
```
From the code chunk above you will notice that within the UI, a fluid page layout is created that specifies a sidebar panel function and a main panel function. The server object then takes an input and an output argument to create a scatterplot. 

To create a Shiny app you can run the entire code chunk. The app uses movies data from DataCamp. Let's start with the sidebar panel. Here you specified variables (from the movies data) for the x-axis, y-axis and a third variable, z, which separates the associated data points according to colour. The main panel function then specifies a scatterplot output. The server object is then used to specify the scatterplot output. It takes the movies dataset and assigns the specified inputs to the x-axis, y-axis and colour variable. Note that these inputs are called as "input$" and then the name of whichever input ID is referred to.

The resultant graph is an interactive scatterplot with options to select a number of variables for the x-axis, y-axis and as colour.

I hope this blog post sparked your interest in the capabilities of Shiny as an incredibly useful (and rather easy to implement) tool. From educational, recreational or corporate settings, one can only imagine the possibilities that Shiny has to offer. So if you would like help with constructing your own Shiny app, [contact us!](https://exegetic-test.netlify.com/#contact)

Code Source: [DataCamp: Building Web Applications in R with Shiny](https://campus.datacamp.com/courses/building-web-applications-in-r-with-shiny/introduction-and-shiny-basics?ex=5)
